NeptunIDE - CakePHP dedicated IDE is now available for everyone!
================================================================

by %s on July 23, 2013

`Two years ago I posted`_ here about my new project - NeptunIDE, a
cloud-based IDE supporting CakePHP.

I was looking for Beta testers and there were many responses, much
more than we could actually handle at that time.

After two years of intensive development NeptunIDE is nearly ready,
and to celebrate this we are opening NeptunIDE Beta today. In the next
couple of days anyone can register and start using NeptunIDE beta
immediately - and totally for free. I'd say that it's ready to use for
production development.

What makes NeptunIDE so special? It's the first IDE with dedicated
CakePHP support.

And what does it mean? It means you can start developing a new CakePHP
project with just a few clicks. It means you can run an action you are
working on by pressing F5 on your keyboard (no matter if you are
editing controller method, view or even CakePHP shell - shell will be
executed in NeptunIDE built-in terminal).

And last, but definitely not least: it means that NeptunIDE will
provide CakePHP autocomplete sugestions based on CakePHP conventions.
No other IDE can provide this by analysing PHP Code. Imagine it: you
type ` $components` in your controller and NeptunIDE suggests you
names of all CakePHP components in your project. You type `
$this->Html->link` in view and NeptunIDE suggests you the list of
controllers and actions that you can link to. You style your CakePHP
project and NeptunIDE suggests automagically created css classes in
your css files.

Well, you don't have to imagine this. You can see it with your own
eyes now! Just sign up for 100% free Beta at `neptunide.com`_. Hurry
up! Free Beta subscription is available only until the end of July
2013 and will run until the end of August 2013.


.. _neptunide.com: http://neptunide.com
.. _Two years ago I posted: http://bakery.cakephp.org/articles/jakubl_1/2011/07/25/neptunide_cakephp_dedicated_ide
.. meta::
    :title: NeptunIDE - CakePHP dedicated IDE is now available for everyone!
    :description: CakePHP Article related to autocomplete,ide,development environment,General Interest
    :keywords: autocomplete,ide,development environment,General Interest
    :copyright: Copyright 2013 
    :category: general_interest

