Cake PHP Rocks
==============

by nuuvoo on February 18, 2008

I have successfully created a website using Cake within a short period
of time. It works great and cake framework simply rocks.
It is very difficult to find websites that are using the Cake
framework and hence the success of this great framework is very
difficult to measure. I thought of posting this on the bakery in the
interest of finding other websites that run using cake.

I have been in the technology industry for over 12 years, starting my
career as a developer. I have not written a single line of code in
over 8 years and have mostly dealt with enterprise level systems
although I have run IT infrastructure for a web based company and thus
understand the Internet.

When we decided to launch our own company, LAMP stack was a good
choice as it offered as easy way to build and a cheaper means to
deploy. But using PHP meant deviating away from the MVC framework
which I loved and something that kept building and management of web
applications easy. My research led me to the Cake Framework.

It took me a while to get used to its syntax and while there is some
good written material out there, the bakery, the manual in cakephp.org
and the Google groups really helped me. It would be nice if someone
authored a good book on Cakephp.

I took about 4 months to build and launch my website
(`http://www.nuuvoo.com`_) working part-time. The last month, I have
spent quite a bit of time as the website was mostly built and the
excitement of launch prompted a slurry of feature additions. Within 2
weeks of launch, we are showing up on some Google search results as
well.

Cake framework really rocks as I could not have built it without the
MVC framework for PHP. Using only PHP would have discouraged me.

I want to thank everyone who have built this framework and continue to
enhance it. I do hope that someone who is an expert in technical
writing and is hoping to publish their first book will take the
interest and write a book.

I am also interested in finding out other websites that run on Cake
and share their interests with the community. Please respond to this
post with your experiences.

Thanks.
Sai
`http://www.nuuvoo.com`_

.. _http://www.nuuvoo.com: http://www.nuuvoo.com/
.. meta::
    :title: Cake PHP Rocks
    :description: CakePHP Article related to Cake experiences,http://www.nuuvoo.co,Cake Rocks,Framework,General Interest
    :keywords: Cake experiences,http://www.nuuvoo.co,Cake Rocks,Framework,General Interest
    :copyright: Copyright 2008 nuuvoo
    :category: general_interest

