CakePHP In the Enterprise
=========================

by %s on December 17, 2009

There are many e-commerce platforms (both open and closed source) on
the market, however, most of these e-commerce solutions are overly
complex for the needs of the average user. In addition, the most
popular open source e-commerce solutions tend to have blocks of poor
quality and erroneous code which make maintaining concurrent versions
and upgrading very difficult. With this in mind, UGR Works set out to
create a streamlined e-commerce platform with a clean code base which
was easy to set-up, maintain and upgrade.
UGR Works wanted the software to cater for the most common
requirements of online retailers without, as much e-commerce software
is, being clogged with additional features that are of no use to the
majority of clients and simply serve to slow the software down. In
addition, the e-commerce solution had to enable multiple store support
for freelancers and agencies wishing to offer their clients a complete
e-commerce solution.

UGR Works first considered developing their own PHP framework, but,
after researching this option and a number of other frameworks for
PHP, it became apparent that CakePHP was the clear choice for the
project. Its MIT licensing model, the growing community of users and
the speed in which it enabled development helped empower the UGR Works
technical team to bring the project to fruition within budget and to
the required time-scale. This is why UGR Works is committed to making
a donation to the CakePHP project for every licence sold.

During the building of Sunshine (the multiple store solution for
freelancers and agencies), UGR Works utilised all of the features of
CakePHP and made extensive use of helpers, models and unit testing.
They also employed the use of Smarty (for bespoke end user templates),
MySQL, Ruckusing (for database migrations), and Git (for version
control).

UGR's Sunshine has been in development for 9 months, of this time,
about 6 months were spent on focused, full-time development.
Ultimately, CakePHP was highly instrumental in the success of this
project. CakePHP has helped facilitate UGR Works to create a very
stable and successful e-commerce platform in record time - an
impressive feat considering the complexities of the task that was set.

The software itself is already causing a buzz amongst Scottish new
media agencies. The UGR Works team are looking forward to exciting
times ahead as they continue to develop their software.

UGR's Sunshine is a standing testament to the power of CakePHP, thank
you to the developers of CakePHP!

`http://www.ugrworks.com/`_

.. _http://www.ugrworks.com/: http://www.ugrworks.com/
.. meta::
    :title: CakePHP In the Enterprise
    :description: CakePHP Article related to Application,ecommerce,Case Studies
    :keywords: Application,ecommerce,Case Studies
    :copyright: Copyright 2009 
    :category: case_studies

