Boost performance by removing .htaccess PLUS multi-site with
VirtualDocumentRoot
===================

by %s on November 29, 2010

This tutorial is intended for developers who: 1) Are creating a cake
app that needs to scale 2) Use apache and have access to modify their
apache config Using apache .htaccess files is a huge performance hit -
and should be avoided at all costs. The tutorial below will show you
how to get "pretty url" features of cake, while not having to use
.htaccess to do so. The first half of the article will explain how to
get rid of .htaccess, while the second half will tie it into a more
complex (but real world) example of how you can leverage this while
using 1 apache config to serve multiple subdomains.


Background
~~~~~~~~~~
In general, you should never use .htaccess files unless you don't have
access to the main server configuration file --apache.org
First off a little background. Htaccess files are resource hogs. If
enabled, on every request your disk is hit multiple times as apache
looks for these files in every directory from your document root all
the way up to where the content that is being requested actually
lives. In addition, directives in .htaccess files found in this search
have to be merged with the apache config directives in memory that
overlap in the same scope. Apache has some nice examples and further
explanation here:
`http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/howto/htaccess.html#when`_

Part 1: say bye to .htaccess
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
OK so now that you understand the problem, lets solve it. Most things
that can be done in an .htaccess file can be done in a Directory
container. Lets get right to the solution, then I will explain. your
apache config file:

::

    <VirtualHost *:80>
            ServerName www.leaguelogix.com
            ServerAlias www.leaguelogix.com leaguelogix.com
            DocumentRoot /var/www/leaguelogix/app/webroot
    
            Options -Indexes FollowSymLinks
    
    	#disable htaccess starting at /
           <Directory />
                    AllowOverride none
            </Directory>
    
           <Directory /var/www/leaguelogix/app/webroot/>
                    RewriteEngine On
                    RewriteBase /
                    RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d
                    RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
                    RewriteRule ^(.*)$ index.php?url=$1 [QSA,L]
    
                    <Files sitemap.xml>
                            RewriteEngine Off
                    </Files>
            </Directory>
    </VirtualHost>

First disable searching and parsing of htaccess by doing

::

    <Directory />
        AllowOverride none
    </Directory>

This will prevent apache from looking for it anywhere throughout the
request. You can delete .htaccess files from your cake project at this
point - but you don't have to.

Setup your DocumentRoot to point to your cake app's webroot dir.

Then setup the rewrite rules.

::

                    
                    RewriteEngine On
                    RewriteBase /
                    RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d
                    RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
                    RewriteRule ^(.*)$ index.php?url=$1 [QSA,L]

I don't want to get into the power and complexity of mod_rewrite in
this article, so I'll briefly summarize. These rules will take
requests that are not for files or directores, and internally re-
direct the request to the index.php file in the cake webroot
directory. This facilitates the "magic" of mapping pretty URL's (named
after your controller for example) into the cake framework.

Now restart apache (sudo /etc/init.d/apache2 restart) and you should
be off and running.


Part 2: A real world example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
So that was easy right? Now for a real life example where this gets
more complex (but very helpful).

If you were curious, and went to leaguelogix.com, you'll notice its
not a cake app at all. It's just a wp blog that I setup in ~ 30mins.
My cake app (and my real product) is a web app platform that drives
many sites. My startup provides tooling that allows one person to
easily manage and run many sports leagues - and each customer gets
their own website (and domain).

I wanted to have a way where potential customers could quickly create
a site for free, to test out my product. So instead of having a
website, they could just get a mysite.leaguelogix.com subdomain. I
wanted to keep avoiding .htaccess, as well as not having to make a
separate virtual host for each subdomain. The cakephp platform (my
app) is common among all sites - there is just a bit of config and
look and feel that is unique to a site.

Here is where Apache's VirtualDocumentRoot and the topic discussed in
Part 1 pays off. Again, right to the code, then an explanation.

::

    <VirtualHost *:80>
    	#this handles sitename.leaguelogix.com
    	ServerName leaguelogix.com
    	ServerAlias *.leaguelogix.com
                 
            Options -Indexes FollowSymLinks
    
    	UseCanonicalName Off
    	VirtualDocumentRoot /opt/leagues/sites/%1/app/webroot
    
    	<Directory />
    	        AllowOverride none
    	</Directory>
    
    	<Directory "/opt/leagues/sites/*/app/webroot/">
    		RewriteEngine On
    		RewriteBase /
    		RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-d
    		RewriteCond %{REQUEST_FILENAME} !-f
    		RewriteRule ^/opt/leagues/sites/(.*)/app/webroot/(.*)$ index.php?url=$2 [QSA,L]
    
    		<Files sitemap.xml>
    		    RewriteEngine Off
    		</Files>
    	</Directory>
    </VirtualHost>

So I'll discuss the delta's from Part 1.

::

    UseCanonicalName Off
    VirtualDocumentRoot /opt/leagues/sites/%1/app/webroot

This allows you to use one apache config to serve many document roots
based on the domain that is entered. EX: a request for
`http://mysite.leaguelogix.com`_ will set the document root to
/opt/leagues/sites/mysite/app/webroot. Cool eh? So no need to make new
apache vhost and reload the config every time i get a new "trial"
customer.

Now the tricky part - loading mod_vhost_alias and using
VirtualDocumentRoot throws a wrench into our simple mod_rewrite
directives in Part 1. It now sends the entire fully qualified path to
RewriteRule. Cakes index.php?url does not work with this. The
following line takes care of that:

::

    RewriteRule ^/opt/leagues/sites/(.*)/app/webroot/(.*)$ index.php?url=$2 [QSA,L]

This will "strip off" the webroot, and pass the url that cake needs
($2).


A gotcha
~~~~~~~~
Because apache's VirtualDocumentRoot does not set DOCUMENT_ROOT
correctly (its a bug thats been open in apache for long time), you
need to do the following in your PHP code if you use 'DOCUMENT_ROOT':

::

    
    $_SERVER['DOCUMENT_ROOT'] = str_replace($_SERVER['SCRIPT_NAME'],"",$_SERVER['SCRIPT_FILENAME']);

thats it - good luck and hope this helped.

NOTE: While I have done some testing on this - I should note that I
have not put this into production yet. Please feel free to post
comments on potential pitfalls this approach might have. I will try to
respond to comments/questions the best I can...

Interested in squeezing more performance out of Cake? Check out a nice
article from pseudocoder here:
`http://www.pseudocoder.com/archives/2009/03/17/8-ways-to-speed-up-
cakephp-apps/`_

.. _http://mysite.leaguelogix.com: http://mysite.leaguelogix.com/
.. _http://www.pseudocoder.com/archives/2009/03/17/8-ways-to-speed-up-cakephp-apps/: http://www.pseudocoder.com/archives/2009/03/17/8-ways-to-speed-up-cakephp-apps/
.. _http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/howto/htaccess.html#when: http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/howto/htaccess.html#when
.. meta::
    :title: Boost performance by removing .htaccess PLUS multi-site with VirtualDocumentRoot
    :description: CakePHP Article related to vendor,plugin,Template,best practice,all in one,Tutorials
    :keywords: vendor,plugin,Template,best practice,all in one,Tutorials
    :copyright: Copyright 2010 
    :category: tutorials

