

Website Title and Character Set Component
=========================================

by %s on September 05, 2011

This component allows you to pass a URL to one of its functions and
retrieve an external page's and character set.

Usage:

#. Add the website.php component to your "/app/controllers/components"
   folder, and then include it in your controller using:

::

    	public $components = array('Website');

#. Call either of the two functions in your controller:

::

    	debug($this->Website->getTitle('http://www.cakephp.org'));
    	debug($this->Website->getCharset('http://www.cakephp.org'));



Let me know if you have any problems!

---------------------------------
Arron Bailiss
`http://www.arronbailiss.com`_

* * Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for
any * purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the
above * copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all
copies. * * THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS
ALL WARRANTIES * WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF * MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR * ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES * WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA
OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN * ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER
TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF * OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE. */ class WebsiteComponent extends Object
{ /** * Reference to the controller using this component * @var
Controller */ protected $controller; /** * Time in seconds to cache
website information * @var int */ public $cacheLimit; /** * Setup the
component ready for use * @param Controller $controller */ public
function startup($controller = null) { App::import('Core',
'HttpSocket'); $this->HttpSocket = new HttpSocket(); $this->controller
= $controller; $this->cacheLimit = 60 * 15; // 15 mins } /** * Get the
page title from a URL * @param string $url URL to retrieve the page
title from * @param bool $html Set to TRUE to retrieve the html
entities title */ public function getTitle($url = '', $html = false) {
if (empty($url)) return false; $title = ''; $request =
$this->__loadContent($url); $content = $request['content'];
$currCharset = $this->getCharset($url); if (!empty($content)) { // Get
the page title and convert to UTF-8 $matches = array(); preg_match('#


.. _http://www.arronbailiss.com: http://www.arronbailiss.com
.. meta::
    :title: Website Title and Character Set Component
    :description: CakePHP Article related to encoding,page title,charset,website,Components
    :keywords: encoding,page title,charset,website,Components
    :copyright: Copyright 2011 
    :category: components

