NeptunIDE: CakePHP dedicated IDE
================================

by jakubl on July 25, 2011

NetBeans supports Symfony, Zend Studio supports Zend Framework, but no
IDE has support for CakePHP, one of the most popular PHP frameworks.
For me, a fan of CakePHP, it was really frustrating that I was not
able to develop CakePHP applications as comfortably as other
developers using different frameworks, so I decided to write NeptunIDE
- a cloud based IDE with a special support for my favourite PHP
framework.

Now, I’d like to share my job with others, and I’m looking for beta-
testers, who will help me make it better. You may sign up for beta at
`www.NeptunIDE.com`_

It’s still work in progress and I plan to start beta testing phase at
the beginning of August. Until the end of July I'm developing the
project at Global Startup Challenge 2011 competition with two friends.

The idea behind NeptunIDE is not only to support CakePHP as much as
possible, including dedicated autocompletion, graphical frontend for
bake and easy creation of new CakePHP projects, but also to integrate
popular development software like Xdebug, Unit testing, continuous
integration tools into one application. I’d like to include external
libraries manager with automatic dependencies and updates too. The aim
of my IDE is to make development easier, faster and more comfortable
than ever before. As NeptunIDE is a cloud based application, it will
be possible to develop using a tablet or Chromebook. More info about
features dedicated to CakePHP can be found on my `latest blog post`_

I warmly invite you to sign up for beta test and I’m looking forward
to getting feedback from you.


.. _www.NeptunIDE.com: http://www.neptunide.com/
.. _latest blog post: http://blog.neptunide.com/2011-07/cakephp-support-in-neptunide-part-i/
.. meta::
    :title: NeptunIDE: CakePHP dedicated IDE
    :description: CakePHP Article related to ide,cakephp tools,General Interest
    :keywords: ide,cakephp tools,General Interest
    :copyright: Copyright 2011 jakubl
    :category: general_interest

