Prevent render layout elements with the render of some views!
=============================================================

by saidbakr on April 20, 2012

This snippet is meant by the situation in-which you want to prevent
some elements in the layout from render while some views is rendered.

Consider the following example, there is an element that displays the
top searched keywords and it is named top_searches.ctp. This element
is placed in the layout to be rendered under the search box element.

Suppose now, we have an index view that lists all searched keywords
and we don't want to make the top_searches elements to be rendered
while we call the index view.

We should add the following code snippet into the most upper line of
top_searches, i.e line 1.

::

    <?php
    $e = explode('views/elements/',__FILE__);
    $e[1] = str_replace('.ctp', '', $e[1]);
    if (isset($this->preventElement) && $e[1] == $this->preventElement[$e[1]]) return false;
    ?>

Simply the above code extracts the path and name of the element's ctp
file relative to the elements directory, then, it asks for an array
property of the View object called preventElement, if it find the name
of the element is set as a key valued by its name too, it will return
false to prevent the rest of the element to be rendered.

Now in the index.ctp we should add the following code:

::

    <?php $this->preventElement['top_searches'] = 'top_searches';?>

I placed the above line of code on the first line too, it is,
obviously, that we defined the preventElement property and we set the
name of the element we want to stop or prevent its render.

There is a working example of this snippet
at:`http://quran.2index.net`_ You will see a list for top searched
keywords, you will see the last item is red button that linked to the
full index of all searched keywords, at this linked page, you will not
see the to searched keywords list. Notice: The working example website
in Arabic language.


.. _http://quran.2index.net: http://quran.2index.net

.. author:: saidbakr
.. categories:: articles, snippets
.. tags:: view,layout,elements,prevent,Snippets

