Creating Questions And Answers Application From Scratch With CakePHP
====================================================================

by %s on April 12, 2011

Considering the popularity of question and answer application, I built
kind of this application using Cake PHP tha (Below I've explained why)
Recently, questions and answers applications are very popular. Among
of them is a yahoo answer, stackoverflow and the famous one, quora.
The application is very interesting because the user can ask about
something, and other users can help other people with the answers. At
a glance these application si similiar like forums, but some of them
adding interesting features, such as the user can follow other users
like twitter application. Inspired by this, I tried to create
applications that have a similar function, namely `kriuq.com`_.
Because I used to use CakePHP, so I decided to make this site using
cakephp as a framework and jquery for the front end. To design, I just
rely on CSS, because I'm not good at using graphic design applications
such as Photoshop or illustrator. I also pay attention on SEO aspect
and make sure that my application is search engine friendly and well
indexed, thanks to cakephp routes :d. I am is full time employees at
one company. Therefore, I only do it on weekends, about 8 - 12 hours
per week. After 4 months, the application is ready for production. If
you are interested to see this application, you can visited at
`kriuq.com`_

.. _kriuq.com: http://kriuq.com
.. meta::
    :title: Creating Questions And Answers  Application From Scratch With CakePHP
    :description: CakePHP Article related to ,Case Studies
    :keywords: ,Case Studies
    :copyright: Copyright 2011 
    :category: case_studies

