

CakePHP 1.3.10 released
=======================

by %s on May 30, 2011

Today we're excited to release CakePHP 1.3.10, which emerges hot on
the heels of CakePHP 1.3.9 to addresses a specific issue with cookie
deletion that emerged in CakePHP 1.3.9.

This release contains 10 commits, and 3 bug fixes.

An addition has been made to check for URL Rewriting capabilities on
your web server, providing a helpful message with links to the CakePHP
book for assistance to configure URL rewriting.

The XML class previously incorrectly processed elements with children
for slugging, this has also been fixed.

Further to these updates, more testing has been aded to ensure the
functionality of the Media view, as well as correct handling for
uppercase file extensions.

Finally, we've added the test suite icons to the distribution meaning
that offline testing gives you pretty pictures in the test suite!

CakePHP 1.3.10 is a short release, but we're glad to be able to get
these fixes and enhancements out to the community quickly. We hope you
enjoy it!

`CakeFest 2011`_ was announced a couple of weeks ago, but we'd like to
remind you all about this years conference. This years host city is
Manchester in the UK. We've booked an exciting venue, and we're
looking forward to a massive turnout of CakePHP developers, and core
CakePHP contributors. Early bird ticket sales are on now, so take
advantage of this reduced rate ticket while its still on! CakeFest
consists of 4 days of activities. The first two days comprise a
workshop where you can learn about CakePHP at a beginner or advanced
level in one of the two concurrent sessions that we'll be running. The
second two days are the conference, with talks presented from speakers
all over the world. Don't miss this amazing opportunity to mix with
your peers, learn some new things about CakePHP and extend your
existing knowledge! We look forward to seeing you there!


.. _CakeFest 2011: http://cakefest.org
.. meta::
    :title: CakePHP 1.3.10 released
    :description: CakePHP Article related to release,CakePHP,cakefest,News
    :keywords: release,CakePHP,cakefest,News
    :copyright: Copyright 2011 
    :category: news

