Oilfield App Needed in a Hurry
==============================

by BlenderStyle on September 23, 2006

I was hired to design a new web application for an oilfield company.
The trick was, they needed it in a hurry. After reading CakePHP's
manual and going through the tutuorial, I knew this would be a piece
of cake (pun intended).
The oilfield application I needed to design was pretty straight
forward. Each client has a lease, and each lease has several wells.
Since CakePHP uses the model-view-controller architecture, I knew the
time required to design the base application would be minimal. With
CakePHP's models, controllers, and a nice feature called scaffolding,
I had my application running with user authentication in well under an
hour. That's it! Of course, scaffolding is only a temporary solution,
so I had to move on to the views.

Making HTML forms is really boring, but luckilly, CakePHP has a great
HTML helper that can do forms, images, and all kinds of other tags.
Within minutes, I had all of scaffolding replaced with my own custom
pages. I wanted to use AJAX for the tools needed to administer the
various aspects of the website, to give it that nice web 2.0 feel. I'm
still pretty new to AJAX, and everytime I've delved into it, I spent
most of my time pulling my hair out trying to get my project to work
in the popular browsers. After using CakePHP's AJAX helper, I was
relieved by how easy my interfaces came together, and thankfully, my
hair remained spiked.

No matter what, you'll have to revisit your code to make changes, fix
bugs, or add features at some point. Well, about a month after the
site was live, I was asked to add some features. I had been working on
two other projects in the meantime, and had completely forgotten about
my oilfield application. However, after looking at the models and
controllers it all came back to me. CakePHP allows for very modular
programming (thanks to MVC), so it was easy to quickly add the
features I was asked to do. My customer was shocked by how fast I was
able to roll out the new feature, and to be honest, so was I.

CakePHP is great for anyone who knows PHP and is planning to develop
any size web applications. The community is growing quickly too, and
during my project, I had to ask a lot of questions on the CakePHP
Google group. The answers were flying back at me. After a bit of
reflection, I realize that everything about CakePHP is simply fast.

.. meta::
    :title: Oilfield App Needed in a Hurry
    :description: CakePHP Article related to inspiration,motivation,webapp,oilfield,experience,development,agile,Case Studies
    :keywords: inspiration,motivation,webapp,oilfield,experience,development,agile,Case Studies
    :copyright: Copyright 2006 BlenderStyle
    :category: case_studies

