After 3 years, looking back and moving ahead
============================================

On April 15 2005, the first version of Cake was released by Michal
Tatarynowicz. On April 15, 2008, three years from this auspicious day
and the start of this great project, the project continued to evolve,
ensuring that CakePHP will grow and prosper for years to come.
Many people familiar with the project know that PhpNut took over as
the lead developer in July 2005. Since that time he has been
instrumental in driving the project forward, from setting up the svn
to handling contributions and contributing a lot of great code of his
own. In August 2005, Nate joined the project and he too began
contributing to the code that became 1.0. I was invited into the role
of project manager in Oct 2005, where I set out to spread the good
word and build the community. For the rest of 2005 and 2006, PhpNut
and I worked extensively on everything that happened with the CakePHP
project. We built the Bakery, so users would have a place to share
knowledge. We established CakeForge, so the community would have a
place to build applications on CakePHP. I built the Bin, so IRC users
could help each other easily. We spent countless hours in IRC helping
the community. We formed the Cake Software Foundation, so the project
would live on forever.

CakePHP has become a tremendous success. The success should be
directly attributed to the greater community who share our vision. We
have put in a tremendous amount of work, but none of it would happen
without the community. As project manager, I hear a lot of things, I
see a lot of things, I talk to lots of people and I try to look at the
project from a broader perspective. I try to be as objective as
possible, always keeping in mind that what is best for the community
is best for CakePHP. The best thing for the community in 2005-2006 was
a stable release. We released 1.0 on May 1, 2006. Shortly thereafter
we moved to 1.1 and this has been the stable version for close to 2
years.

CakePHP 1.2 brought with it a lot of changes with the dev release on
Christmas Day 2006 and finally the beta version on New Year's Day
2007. While the feature set of 1.2 dominates any other framework, we
have been slow to reach a stable release. Nate took a much larger role
in the development of the 1.2 core and I contributed some new
features. We have taken in more community contributions and involved
more people in 2007 than any year before. We had our first pure
CakePHP gathering and introduced CakePHP to many new developers.

We are all very passionate about the code, the community, and the
philosophy behind this framework. Our passion is shared by the
community and the larger team that has formed over the last few years.
We are truly dedicated to producing the best framework and with this
in mind the team is now evolving along with the code. The evolving
team will still include the core team, with me as Project Manager
helping to usher in new developers and provide opportunity for more
people to get involved, PhpNut acting in an advisor's role, ensuring
that the right code gets implemented and more people learn the magic
of CakePHP, Nate taking the lead role in the implementation of the
core code, and John continuing to lead the documentation efforts. If
you are interested in how the rest of the team is evolving, keep an
eye on the Trac contributors page [1]. We are all committed to this
new structure, with more respect, more trust, and more opportunity for
growth.

We are excited to share with you all developments and we see a great
future the CakePHP community. Stay tuned for more new developments and
expect the next 1.2 release in the coming weeks.

Bake On.

[1] `https://trac.cakephp.org/wiki/Contributors`_

.. _https://trac.cakephp.org/wiki/Contributors: https://trac.cakephp.org/wiki/Contributors

.. author:: gwoo
.. categories:: news
.. tags:: ,News

