

CakeFest 2012 - Schedule posted! Get your tickets now!
======================================================

by %s on July 15, 2012

The CakeFest 2012 talks schedule has been posted on the CakeFest
website. Get in and purchase your tickets today before the end of the
Early-bird period!

CakeFest 2012 is getting closer every day. With only 45 days to go,
now is the best time to jump in and grab your Conference and/or
Workshop tickets before the end of the early-bird period.

The schedule has been `posted online on the CakeFest Website`_. Check
it out for the latest information about the schedule and talks being
given!

The line up this year is spectacular! We have talent from around the
world, and some big names from the CakePHP community giving talks on a
huge range of topics. CakeFest is simply the best way to learn about
CakePHP, to meet new people in the community and to extend your
existing skill set.

We'd like to extend a special thankyou to SANIsoft and Microsoft, both
of whom are sponsoring CakeFest, and have a long history of supporting
CakePHP and the PHP community.

Also, a huge thanks to EngineYard, who have also sponsored the event
this year. Its great to see some industry players such as EngineYard
showing support for events like CakeFest, and other PHP events around
the world.

Again, please `checkout the latest information on tickets`_, and be
sure to grab yours before the 21st July, when the Early-Bird period
ends!


.. _checkout the latest information on tickets: http://cakefest.org/ticket-info
.. _posted online on the CakeFest Website: http://cakefest.org/talks
.. meta::
    :title: CakeFest 2012 - Schedule posted! Get your tickets now!
    :description: CakePHP Article related to CakePHP,conference,cakefest,News
    :keywords: CakePHP,conference,cakefest,News
    :copyright: Copyright 2012 
    :category: news

